SATIRA VIII.

F umosos equitum cum dictatore magistr05‚

ι Si coram Lepidis male vivitur Ρ effigies quo

Tot bellatorum, si luditur alea pernox ’ 10
Ante Numantinos; si dormire incipis ortu

Lucifen‘, quo signa duces et castra movebant?

Cur Allobrogicis? et magna gaudeat ara -

Natus in Herculeo Fabius Lare, si cupidus, si

Vanus et Euganea quantumvis mollior agna3 . ἰς’
S'i tenerum attritus Catinensi pumice lumbum

squalentes traducit avos emtorque veneni

Frangenda miseram funestat imagine gentem ?

Tota licet veteres exornent ⁴undique cerae

Atria, nobilitas sola est atque unica virtus, ² 20

touch with a great deal of wand.”
Both the last give multa an un·
pleasant sense. ·

8 enm dictatore
tor here and there.
of9thffln1dhpfflhffhffibmeiliimgm
the Consul of nc. 79, only remark·
able for his premature and disloyal
attempt to undo Sulla’s work, and
the Triumvir. One is tempted to ask
why the ghostlge presence of the
Lepidi should an aid to sels·
control. The answer is that they
were one of the few great families
of the republic that retained their
greatness under the early em ire,
that a son of the triumvir h d a
ve high position and bore a very
,hig ,character in the reigns of
Augustus and TiberiuS, and lastly
that it is safe to assume, that when
Juvenal wrote, a sca ce of the
name was or had late ξῗέειι notori-

“ With a dieta·

⁸ ous.

11 flumanflnos] = Aemilianos
su 0 ο N
‹ 1p3,31)4] “What good does Fabius
get from the fact that his famil
earned a name from the Allobroges '
f whose submission his ancestor re-
ceived, after conquering Bituitus

king of the Arverni, B.c. 121), “or
from the ‘ara maxima’ of Hercules ”
(of which the Fabii claimed the
priesthood)? Tbere may be two
reasons why ,the con ueror of
Bituitus is referred to ra her than
the greater Fabii of the Samnite
and Punic warS. In the first place,
their line seems to have died out;
Allobrogicus was the son of an
AEmilius adopted into the Fabian
house. In the second place, his son
was forbidden by the praetor to ad·
minister to his father’s property on
account of his notorious vices Cic.

pelled by the Heneti, have given
their names to the hills nine miles
south · west of Padua. Martial
referred the breeds of Apulia and
arma (xiv. ι 5 5). “
16 catinensi] “Such as Catina
produces and employs.” Cf. “Osce
senex Catinaeque puer Cumana
meretrix ” Bibaculus (ap. Schol.).
18.] The ⁴ gens ⁹ is already in
possession of his image. On his
conviction it has to be broken: it ,
would compromise them to keep

· it.

